Black Friday is back—even if many of the door-buster deals aren’t.

Millions of Americans visited bricks-and-mortar stores on the Friday after Thanksgiv-ing this year as the Covid-19 pandemic recedes and people return to prepandemic habits. That is a reversal of the past two years, when they were largely stuck at home and did more shopping online. This year, however, many household budgets are pinched by high gasoline and grocery prices.

Early signs pointed to more muted activity than last year. People spent $5.3 billion online on Thanksgiving Day, up 2.9% from the holiday last year, according to Adobe Analytics, which tracks spending on websites. Adobe forecasts that online spending on Black Friday itself will be between $9 billion and $9.2 billion, up 1% to 3% from a year ago.

Gabriela Faria, a 26-year-

The Numbers: If price ended in 99, you likely overpaid.... A2

People flocked to stores around the country on Friday in search of holiday deals amid a return to prepandemic habits. Clockwise, from top, shoppers at a Best Buy in Chicago, outside Macy’s in New York City and at the Opry Mills Mall in Nashville, Tenn.

CLOCKWISE FROM TOP: JIM VONDRUSKA/ REUTERS; JUTHARAT PINYODOONYACHET FOR THE WALL STREET JOURNAL; SETH HERALD/ AFP/ GETTY IMAGES

old substitute teacher from Yonkers, N.Y., was at her local Kohl’s by about 5 a.m. to take advantage of deals for her Christmas shopping. Also, she said, because after two years of avoiding the Black Friday tradition because of Covid, “I’m over online shopping.”

She and her friends made a plan to go out this year. “We want to go and touch things, see them and just get them now,” she said.

At the store, about a half-dozen employees clustered near the front entrance greeting arriving customers. The registers were free of lines, and signs advertised discounts throughout the store.

With many stores closed on Thanksgiving, retailers prepared for a surge on Friday. Sales, excluding

car dealerships, were forecast to increase 15% compared with Black Friday last year, according to Mastercard SpendingPulse, which measures in-store and online retail sales across all payment types. Sales at physical stores were expected to rise 18% on Black Friday, while online sales were expected to be up 3.7%, Mastercard said.

“This is the closest to a normal Black Friday that we’ve had in several years,” said Stephen Lebovitz, chief executive of mall owner CBL & Associates Properties.

Many retailers started dangling big discounts in October to unload excess inventory as supply-chain bottlenecks have eased. But the bargains weren’t enough to tempt some shoppers as concerns about inflation and the economy continued to mount. Macy’s Inc., Kohl’s Corp. and other chains said sales slowed in October and early November as people delayed holiday purchases, although the business picked up in recent weeks as cold weather blanketed the North-east and other parts of the country.

On Wednesday, the University of Michigan released its November consumer-sentiment index, which fell 5.2% from October and is down 15.7% compared with November 2021. “Along with the ongoing impact of inflation, consumer attitudes have also been weighed down by rising borrowing costs, declining asset values and weakening labor-market expectations,” said Joanne Hsu, the survey’s director.

One casualty of the pandemic that isn’t returning in full force is the traditional door-buster—goods offered at deep discounts for a limited time, typically during early-morning hours, to draw customers. Shoppers often lined up for deals on big-screen TVs and other goods. At times, the crowds turned dangerous, as people stampeded into stores to get items before they sold out. “Door-busters scare people,” said Marshal Cohen, chief industry adviser of market-research firm NPD Group Inc. “They don’t want to fight the crowds and get up at 4 a.m.”

Walmart Inc., Target Corp., Best Buy Co., and Macy’s are among the chains that stopped doing door-busters during the pandemic, when they had to limit the number of people in stores for health reasons. They have switched to promotions that run for longer periods, sometimes all day or a week.

Target has been dropping new deals every Sunday


since October, including Black Friday deals available this week. Walmart started offering “Black Friday Deals for Days,” starting Nov. 7. Best Buy’s Black Friday sale began Nov. 20. And Macy’s started offering early-access deals on Nov. 7, with its entire Black Friday promotions available Nov. 20 through Nov. 26.

“We were getting complaints from customers, who were coming in only to find the item they wanted was sold out,” Macy’s Chief Executive Jeff Gennette said of its door-busters. “People want to shop when they want to shop. They don’t necessarily want to come in during that morning window.”

Arianna O’Dell, a 32-year-old songwriter who lives in Manhattan, bought a dishwasher in October for 30% off as a Christmas present for herself. “I thought, maybe I should wait until Black Friday,” Ms. O’Dell said. “But I didn’t want to be up until midnight on Thanksgiving.”

18% Friday’s expected rise in sales at physical stores from 2021.

European Union talks on approving a price cap on Russian oil hit a snag amid differences among the 27 member states, although diplomats said they were hopeful a deal could be struck in the coming days.

EU governments have clashed over the price level at which to set the cap and some of the other details of the mechanism put forth by the Group of Seven advanced democracies. The price cap is the West’s attempt to squeeze Russia’s oil revenues as punishment for its invasion of Ukraine while keeping global oil supplies steady—and avoiding an increase in global energy prices. With it, the G-7 and Australia aim to ban providing maritime services for Russian oil shipments unless the oil is sold below the price.

Discussions among the bloc’s officials had been expected to continue Friday evening and possibly over the weekend, but EU officials said they needed more time to broker a deal.

The European Commission, the bloc’s executive arm, and the G-7 have been looking at a price cap of between $60 and $70 a barrel. That is above the price at which Russian oil is currently selling.

All 27 EU member states must agree on the price. The G-7 is racing to put the price cap into effect by Dec. 5, when an EU embargo on Russian crude-oil imports takes effect.

Officials in Washington and around the G-7 were awaiting the EU’s choice and have expected the bloc to take some time to complete the negotiations. G-7 officials have been supportive of the prices discussed in the EU.

U.S. officials, and in particular Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen, have championed the price-cap plan for months. On Thursday, President Biden told reporters in Nantucket, Mass., that he had spoken to Ms. Yellen about the plan, saying, “It’s in play.”

On Friday, Ukrainian Presi-

Russian forces step up shelling of Kherson................ A8

dent Volodymyr Zelensky praised Poland and the Baltic states for pushing for a far lower price cap. Poland has been calling for a cap of between $20 and $30 a barrel, which Polish officials say is closer to Russia’s cost of production.

“Limiting the price at the level of up to 30 U.S. dollars per barrel seems a more feasible proposal. And I am grateful that such a proposal has been put forward and is being advocated,” Mr. Zelensky said in a speech.

Several EU member states with large maritime industries, especially Greece, Cyprus and Malta, have worried that the price cap could hurt a key part of their economies. They wanted to keep the price level as high as possible, and some had lobbied the commission this past week to offer them compensation for supporting the policy.

On Wednesday, the three EU countries had insisted the price cap shouldn’t be set below $70 a barrel, but EU diplomats suggested they had shown some wiggle room on this during discussions with the commission on Thursday and Friday.

Russian crude oil has fallen in recent days to $56 a barrel, about $28 below the price of benchmark Brent crude, according to S& P Global Commodity Insights.

Russia has refused to abide by the cap, and its response is another wild card.

“We are proceeding for the time being from the position of President Putin that we will not supply oil and gas to those states that introduce and join the cap,” Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said Thursday. He left wiggle room, though, adding that Moscow would formulate a position after analyzing the situation.

This past week’s deadlock underscored longstanding

concerns in the EU over the price cap. European countries had worried that the price cap would be difficult to effectively implement and police and had hoped a number of countries, in addition to the G-7 and Australia, would join the measure.

U.S. officials have said that the price cap would be reviewed regularly and that if the system worked, the price could gradually be tightened. However, some U.S. sanctions experts have warned a price cap north of $60 a barrel would do little to crimp the Kremlin’s revenues.

“If the cap is set at roughly the same price that Russia currently sells its oil, it’s hard to see how the policy will cut Putin’s profits. Hopefully this cap is just a starting point, and the West is prepared to tighten it as market conditions ease,” said Edward Fishman, a senior researcher at Columbia University’s Center for Energy Policy who helped shape U.S. sanctions policy against Russia in the aftermath of its 2014 annexation of Crimea.

Two European diplomats said one factor that could help advance a deal in the coming days is work on a ninth package of sanctions against Russia. Poland and the Baltic states have been urging new penalties against Russia over its invasion of Ukraine in recent weeks.

The European Commission was expected to start discussing which measures to take with member states over the weekend. —Andrew Duehren contributed to this article.

Russia has refused to abide by the cap, and its response is another wild card.

NASSAU, Bahamas—Last year, an FTX executive walked into a bank office here and put $4.5 million of the company’s money behind an ambitious plan to buy an oceanside parcel of land and turn it into the crypto giant’s new headquarters.

The executive, Ryan Salame, closed the deal in short order, people familiar with the matter said, just part of the company’s whirlwind real-estate shopping spree in and around Nassau. In April, the Bahamas prime minister appeared with FTX executives at a ceremonial groundbreaking on the new land. But construction never really got under way. FTX collapsed this month, its real-estate holdings now subsumed in bankruptcy.

The never-built new headquarters illustrates the promise that FTX brought to the Bahamas and the frustration it left in its wake. The island nation has been encouraging crypto firms to make themselves at home, promising a copacetic regulatory touch—exactly what founder Sam Bankman-Fried was looking for when he decided to move FTX headquarters from Hong Kong last year.

FTX wasn’t the only crypto player in town, but it was the flashiest, leasing fleets of cars for its employees to drive, The Wall Street Journal reported. It snapped up units in a luxe resort called Albany—a private neighborhood that has counted Tiger Woods and Jus-

tin Timberlake as investors. Now, local caterers, drivers and cleaners who depended on FTX for work are in a bind.

So is the prime minister, Philip Davis. Across the archipelago, locals are secondguessing his government’s commitment to crypto.

“The Bahamas is getting a black eye at every turn on this,” one of the Bahamas’ largest newspapers, the Nassau Guardian, wrote in an editorial this past week that criticized Mr. Davis’s embrace of FTX.

In a speech to parliament last week, Mr. Davis described FTX’s collapse as merely one example of broader problems in the tech industry and not an indictment of regulatory oversight in the Bahamas. He said the government would investigate FTX thoroughly.

Most everything in the Bahamas centers on the island of New Providence, including

FTX. The 80-square-mile island is home to the Bahamas’ capital, Nassau, and about 275,000 residents, the bulk of the country’s citizens.

The country’s economic anchors are tourism and offshore banking, which together make up 85% of gross domestic product, according to the U.S. Commerce Department.

Mr. Davis, elected in September 2021, has made digital assets a centerpiece of his agenda. The island country had been hit hard by Hurricane Dorian in 2019 and the corona-virus in 2020, both of which kept tourists away. Mr. Davis’s government promised that crypto would be a critical piece of the recovery. “My government’s initial success in attracting significant digital-asset business is only the beginning,” Mr. Davis told the Bahamas’ House of Assembly in April.

For many locals, FTX’s arrival in New Providence last year felt like a path forward. The company’s spending seemed unbounded.

At its offices in a nondescript office park, FTX spent more than $100,000 a week on catering and set up a private shuttle service to cart workers around the island, according to people familiar with the matter.

One chef who delivered meals to FTX offices recalled tables already stacked with containers of food. One former employee described an hourly rotation of food deliveries during lunchtime. Chinese food was a fixture, according to people familiar with the matter, given that many FTX employees had moved from Hong Kong. FTX provided fleets of cars—including BMWs, Toyotas and Hondas— for employee use.

FTX also hired dozens of Bahamians, the Journal reported. The jobs were often for logistics, such as helping organize events, and regulatory compliance.

Earlier this year, FTX employees were given the opportunity to buy equity in the cryptocurrency exchange. Excited to be part of what seemed like a promising new industry, some local hires spent thousands of dollars to buy FTX equity, the Journal reported.

The sites where Mr. Bank-man Fried and his closest associates lived and worked were part of a finance-centric enclave on the western half of New Providence. There, Nassau’s tourist resorts, restaurants and Black residential neighborhoods give way to the offices of foreign banks and wealth


The entrance to FTX office in Nassau, in the Bahamas. ROBYN DAMIANOS FOR THE WALL STREET JOURNAL

managers, a Berkshire Hathaway real-estate office and Deltec Bank & Trust Ltd., a bank where Tether—a popular stablecoin—does business.

FTX spent millions of dollars on housing for executives in exclusive beachside developments, the Journal reported.

FTX bought a handful of units in the Albany resort, a gated neighborhood of homes and sleek condominium towers arranged around a marina. There, Mr. Bankman-Fried shared a $30 million penthouse with some of his top FTX lieutenants.

Some Bahamians are now questioning the role of the crypto sector in their country’s economy, stung by thoughts of how FTX’s rapid collapse has shaped their country’s reputation.

“In the eyes of many people, we’re a joke,” Pamela Musgrove, a Bahamas-based financial-services executive, said on a Nassau radio show this month.

Many of the big-spending young foreigners FTX employed— Americans, Asians and Europeans—departed quickly after the company’s collapse, the Journal reported. Bahamian security guards found themselves protecting nearly vacant buildings.

Mr. Bankman-Fried apologized in a recent note to employees. “You were my family,” he wrote. “I’ve lost that, and our old home is an empty warehouse of monitors.” —Alexander Osipovich, Dave Michaels and Caitlin Ostroff contributed to this article.
Thesis Melee’ Hits Taiwan

dissertations or engaged in improper footnoting.

Liu Yu-shi, a 42-year-old video creator, for one, spent weeks online and at the na-tional library plowing through academic journals and monographs with the goal of taking down politicians he detests.

“If you dare to mess with me,” he says, “I will dig out your file and see what you’ve plagiarized.”

What some observers in Taiwan have dubbed “Dissertation Gate” has gained surprising traction at a critical moment. Chinese leader Xi Jinping has made clear his intent to subdue Taiwan, which China ringed with missiles in August after U.S. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi visited.

That voters should focus on such minutiae as dusty student theses might suggest a yen for distraction in these tense times. Another theory: scholarly mudslinging works in an island democracy deeply enamored with elite education, where some politicians tout academic pedigrees on campaign billboards.

Dueling library gumshoes are throwing the schoolbook at prominent candidates and often trumpeting the investigations on social media or at news conferences.

Thousands of contenders are vying for local posts, from mayors to city councilors, in an election that will test support for the ruling Democratic Progressive Party, which takes a more skeptical approach to Beijing.

Lin Chih-chien, of that party, came under scrutiny

in July, while running for mayor of Taoyuan, one of the more high-profile seats in Taiwan. Novice investigators said they excavated misattributed information in two of his master’s dissertations.

Both universities, in Taiwan, revoked the degrees. Mr. Lin left the race, and his political career imploded. He disputed the plagiarism allegation, and didn’t respond to requests for comment.

After a contender in another key race—who boasted of attending prestigious schools all her life—appeared in a parody music video denouncing supporters of the ruling party, a Taiwan-born university scholar an ocean away in Bellingham, Wash., fired up Google. He unearthed the candidate’s University of Cincinnati doctoral dissertation and identified what he called “big chunks” of pilfered passages.

The candidate, Kao Hung-an, a former aide to billionaire Foxconn Technology Group founder Terry Gou, called the allegations “ blatant lies.”

She has stayed in the race for mayor of Hsinchu, home to chip giant Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. Neither she nor the university responded to requests for comment.

“It’s not just plagiarism, but also violation of copyright, stealing of ideas from co-authors,” says Ms. Kao’s accuser, Chen Shih-fen, who teaches international business at West-ern Washington University. He supports Taiwan’s Democratic Progressive Party, while Ms. Kao is a member of Taiwan People’s Party, whose founding chairman advocates for China-friendly policies.

Even lawmakers not up for re-election are facing scholastic salvos. Legislator Tsai Piru, who has a leadership role in the campaign office of Taiwan People’s Party, denied wrongdoing when amateur detectives said her master’s thesis contained suspicious bits. Her alma mater, in Taiwan, revoked her degree.

“I was humiliated,” says Ms. Tsai. “It’s so unfair.”

Ms. Tsai resigned her seat—calling it a protest against her university.

While old college missteps might seem petty, “the issue at stake is one’s integrity,” says Wang Hong-wei, a Taipei city councilor and member of the opposition Chinese Nationalist Party, or Kuomintang, who herself spent more than a month
It was her aides who pinpointed allegedly iffy academic citations by Mr. Lin, whose mayoral candidacy was upended, after Ms. Wang grew suspicious about two master’s degrees he listed. She’s glad she did. Ms. Wang says dismantling her rivals boosted her popularity.

“I didn’t expect the political fallout to be this big,” she says. “This year has turned into a thesis melee.”

The takedown of Mr. Lin, meanwhile, sparked retaliatory sleuths, including Mr. Liu, the video creator.

Mr. Liu, who favors candidates, such as Mr. Lin, who take a hard line against China, attended vocational school and has no background in academic writing. He goes by the internet persona XXXXCAT, trawls scholarly databases and deploys plagiarism-detection software.

“It’s tiring work,” he says, “ but it gives you a great sense of accomplishment when you finally catch them.”

As you wander the aisles this holiday season you’re likely to encounter the number 9 everywhere. There’s $4.99 for that box of Christmas candy, $299 for that TV, and $99.99 for those stylish headphones.

The trick of using 9s to price items just below some major threshold is so common that we rarely think about it, and if we do it’s likely to pity the poor suckers who don’t know $99.99 is the same as $100.

But the truth is you’ve probably been tripped up by 9-ending prices without even realizing it. A number of researchers have found something surprising about 9-ending prices. It isn’t just that $9.99 isn’t a better deal than $10; it’s that it’s often actually a bad deal.

“The 9-ending does some magic to us,” said Daniel Levy, an economics professor at both Emory University and Israel’s Bar-Ilan University. In a 2021 paper, Mr. Levy and Avichai Snir of Netanya Academic College in Israel found, based on years of data from American grocery stores, that when items’ prices ended in 9, they were on average 18% higher than when those same items’ prices had different endings.

The finding held across a range of items such as cheese, crackers, bottled juices, canned soups, dish detergents, painkillers, cigarettes, toilet paper, soft drinks, shampoos: When an item’s price ended in 9 it was typically more expensive than when it didn’t.

The strategy, called “just below” pricing, as in “$9.99 is just below $10,” as well as psychological, odd or charm pricing, has been around so long no one is sure of its origins. One theory is that the advent of the cash register, which was originally marketed as a device to stop employees from stealing, led to -9 and -99 ending prices because they forced the clerk to open the register—ding!— and record the sale to produce change, making it harder for them to steal the money they had just received.

Robert Schindler, a marketing professor at the Rutgers School of Business-Cam-den, is skeptical of the cash-register theory because he’s found Macy’s newspaper advertisements as early as 1880 touting prices such as $.99 and $1.99, and proclaiming them “positively the best bargains ever offered, and cannot be equaled by any other house.”

He believes the origin was always the psychological trick: Consumers associate 99-cent pricing with good deals because it has been heavily used in advertisements over the years for sales.

Mr. Schindler, 15 years ago, proposed the existence of a “99-meaning paradox”: Consumers strongly associate prices ending in .99 as being low, but that this cannot be due to a correlation between the 99-ending and low prices because such a correlation doesn’t exist.

Yet, if consumers know by now that $9.99 is basically the same as $10, why do retailers, who after all put serious thought into their pricing strategy, still use it?

There are two possible reasons that 9-ending prices still work. The first is simply the familiar idea that con-sumers read prices from left to right, and so might tend to interpret $9.99 as $9-something, and who wouldn’t rather pay $9 than $10?

The second is that people associate 9-ending prices with good deals, or items that are on sale. They don’t see $3.99 is a lot less than $4— obviously, it isn’t. People often buy dozens of items at once and can’t recall the prices they typically pay. It is exhausting to wander the aisles of the grocery store trying to remember what eggs and nutmeg and cinnamon and vanilla and milk and bacon and sausage cost the last time you bought them.

The presence of a 99 serves as a rule of thumb to determine whether a price is better than is typical.

In another paper, Profs. Levy and Snir, along with Alex Gotler of Israel’s Open University and Haipeng Allen Chen of the University of Kentucky, uncovered why retailers use 9-ending prices.

It is simply this: When stores raise a price, they strongly prefer charm prices to soften the blow. When they lower prices, however, they have many ways to call attention to the sale, such as tags

image

with bright red letters at the grocery store that say “SALE: 2 for $7.00” or “SALE: $8.50. Usual price $8.99” which don’t depend on the 9endings, or dropping the price all the way to the next major pricing threshold.

“When I raise the price, I make them 9 ending,” said Mr. Levy. “We don’t want people to notice price increases. The retailer wants people to think the price is still low.”

Acompanion study in Israeli grocery stores found the same effect, suggesting it isn’t just a quirk of U.S. retailers. The prevalence of 9-endings is common far outside of grocery stores too.

In other research, Mr. Levy has documented charm pricing extensively in a database of prices across the internet for items such as CDs, video-games, DVD players, digital cameras, computers and so on.

When prices hit a major 9threshold, they tend to stick there. Prices ending in $.99 or $9.99 or $99.99 are even stickier and less likely to be good deals. You can intuit why. What are the odds that the lowest price someone could profitably sell you a certain size TV would be $399.99? It’s obvious, when you think about it, that $399.99 is probably marked up from the best price that the market could offer.

“Most of us see 9 and think it’s a bargain. It’s exactly the opposite,” Mr. Levy said.



